


                              THE PRINCIPAL

                    NAVIGATIONS, VOYAGES, TRAFFIQUES,

                                  AND

                              DISCOVERIES

                                  OF

                          THE ENGLISH NATION.

                              Collected by

                      RICHARD HAKLUYT, PREACHER,

                                  and

                                Edited by

                       EDMUND GOLDSMID, F.R.H.S.

                                VOL. XIV.


                                AMERICA.

                                PART III.






                                Edinburgh:
                            E. & G. GOLDSMID.
                                  1890.




Contents

(Part II Continued)


    Virginia richly valued, by the description of the maine land of
      Florida, her next neighbour: out of the foure yeeres continuall
      trauell and discouerie, for aboue one thousand miles east and
      west, of Don Ferdinando de Soto and sixe hundred able men in
      his companie.--(_Continued._)                                    5

    An extract of a letter of captaine Francis Vasques de Coronado,
      written to a Secretary of the right noble Don Antonio de
      Mendoça, viceroy of Nueua Espanna. Dated in Culiacan, the 8. of
      March 1539.                                                     60

    A Letter written by the most honourable Lord Don Antonio de
      Mendoça, Vice-roy of Nueua Espanna, to the Emperours Maiestie.  63

    A relation of the reuerend father Frier Marco de Niça, touching
      his discouery of the kingdome of Ceuola or Cibola, situate
      about 30. degrees of latitude, to the North of Nueua Espanna.   67

    El viaie qve hizo Antonio de Espeio en el anno de ochenta y tres:
      el qual con sus companneros descubrieron vna tierra en que
      hallaron quinze prouincias todas llenas de pueblos, y de casas de
      quatro y cinco altos, a quien pusieron por nombre el Nueuo
      Mexico, por parecerse en muchas cosas al viejo. Esta à la parte
      del norte, y se cree que por ella, y por poblado, se puede venir
      hasta llegar a la tierra que llaman del labrador.               84

    A briefe relation of two notable voyages, the first made by frier
      Augustin Ruyz a Franciscan, in the yeere 1581: the second by
      Antonio de Espejo in the yere 1583: who together with his
      company discouered a land wherein they found fifteene prouinces
      all full of townes, conteining houses of foure and fiue stories
      high, which they named New Mexico; for that in many respects it
      resembleth the prouince of olde Mexico. This land is situate to
      the North of Nueua Espanna, and stretcheth from 24 to 34
      degrees and better: by the which and by other inhabited lands
      it is thought that men may trauell euen to Terra de Labrador.
      Taken out of the history of China written by Frier Iuan
      Gonzales de Mendoça, and printed in Madrid 1586.               100

    A letter of Bartholomew Cano from Mexico the 30. of May 1590. to
      Francis Hernandes of Siuil, concerning the speedy building of
      two strong Forts in S. Iohn de Vllua, and in Vera Cruz, as also
      touching a notable new and rich discouery of Cibola or New
      Mexico 400. leagues Northwest of Mexico.                       115

    The relation of Francis Vasquez de Coronado, Captaine general of
      the people which were sent in the name of the Emperours
      maiestie to the Countrey of Cibola newly discouered, which he
      sent to Don Antonio de Mendoça Viceroy of Mexico, of such
      things as happened in his voyage from 22. of Aprill in the
      yeere 1540. which departed from Culiacan forward, and of such
      things as hee found in the Countrey which he passed.           117

    The foresayd Francis Lopez de Gomara in his generall historie of
      the West Indies, Chap. 215. writeth in maner following of
      certaine great and strange beasts neuer seene nor heard of in
      our knowen world of Asia, Europe, and Africa: which somewhat
      resembling our oxen, hauing high bunches on their backes like
      those on the backes of Camels, are therefore called by him
      Vacas corcobados, that is to say, Crooke-backed oxen, being
      very deformed and terrible in shewe, and fierce by nature:
      which notwithstanding for foode, apparell, and other necessarie
      vses, are most seruiceable and beneficiall to the inhabitants
      of those countreys. He reporteth also in the same chapter of
      certaine strange sheepe as bigge as horses, and of dogs which
      vse to carie burthens of 50. pound weight vpon their backes.   136

    The voyage of Robert Tomson Marchant, into Noua Hispania in the
      yeere 1555. with diuers obseruations concerning the state of
      the Countrey: And certaine accidents touching himselfe.        138

    A voyage made by M. Roger Bodenham to S. Iohn de Vllua in the bay
      of Mexico, in the yeere 1564.                                  155

    A notable discourse of M. Iohn Chilton, touching the people,
      maners, mines, cities, riches, forces, and other memorable
      things of New Spaine, and other prouinces in the West Indies,
      seene and noted by himselfe in the time of his trauels,
      continued in those parts, the space of seuenteene or eighteene
      yeeres.                                                        156

    A relation of the commodities of Noua Hispania, and the maners of
      the inhabitants, written by Henry Hawkes merchant, which liued
      fiue yeeres in the sayd countrey, and drew the same at the
      request of M. Richard Hakluyt Esquire of Eton in the county of
      Hereford, 1572.                                                170

    A discourse written by one Miles Philips Englishman, one of the
      company put on shoare Northward of Panuco, in the West Indies,
      by M. Iohn Hawkins 1568. conteining many special things of that
      countrey and of the Spanish gouernment, but specially of their
      cruelties vsed to our Englishmen and amongst the rest to
      himselfe for the space of 15 or 16 yeres together, vntil by
      good and happy means he was deliuered from their bloody hands,
      and returned into his owne Countrey. An. 1582.                 187

    The trauailes of Iob Hortop, which Sir Iohn Hawkins set on land
      within the bay of Mexico, after his departure from the Hauen of
      S. Iohn de Vllua in Nueua Espanna, the 8. of October 1568.     226

    A relation of the Hauen of Tecuanapa, a most conuenient place for
      building of ships, situate vpon the South sea not farre from
      Nicaragua, which was sent vnto the viceroy of Mexico or to the
      king of Spaine: wherein are described the riuers of Ometepec,
      Tlacamama, and Tlacolula falling into the said Hauen, with the
      townes, people, and mountaines adioyning to the said riuers,
      and other things fit for the building and victualling of ships.
                                                                     244

    A briefe relation of two sundry voyages made by the worshipful M.
      William Haukins of Plimmouth, father to Sir Iohn Haukins
      knight, late Treasurer of her Majesties Nauie, in the yeere
      1530 and 1532.                                                 250

    An ancient voyage of M. Robert Reniger and M. Thomas Borey to
      Brasil in the yeere of our Lord 1540.                          251

    A voyage of one Pudsey to Baya in Brasil anno 1542.              252

    A letter written to M. Richard Staper by Iohn Whithal from Santos
      in Brasil, the 26. of Iune 1578.                               252

    A copie of the letters of the Aduenturers for Brasill sent to
      Iohn Whithall dwelling in Santos, by the Minion of London, Anno
      1580. the 24. of October in London.                            256

    Certaine notes of the voyage to Brasil with the Minion of London
      aforesaid, in the yere 1580. written by Thomas Grigs Purser of
      the said ship.                                                 258

    A letter of Francis Suares to his brother Diego Suares dwelling
      in Lisbon, written from the riuer of Ienero in Brasill in Iune
      1596. concerning the exceeding rich trade newly begunne
      betweene that place and Peru, by the way of the Riuer of Plate,
      with small barks of 30. and 40. tunnes.                        263

    The well gouerned and prosperous voyage of M. Iames Lancaster,
      begun with three ships and a galley-frigat from London in
      October 1594, and intended for Fernambuck, the porte-towne of
      Olinda in Brasil. In which voyage (besides the taking of nine
      and twenty ships and frigats) he surprized the sayd port-towne,
      being strongly fortified and manned; and held possession
      thereof thirty dayes together (notwithstanding many bolde
      assaults of the enemy both by land and water) and also
      prouidently defeated their dangerous and almost ineuitable
      fireworks. Heere he found the cargazon or freight of a rich
      East Indian carack; which together with great abundance of
      sugars, Brasil-wood, and cotton he brought from thence; lading
      therewith fifteene sailes of tall ships and barks.             266

    A speciall letter written from Feliciano Cieça de Carualsho the
      Gouernour of Paraiua in the most Northerne part of Brasil,
      1597, to Philip the second king of Spaine, answering his desire
      touching the conquest of Rio Grande, with the relation of the
      besieging of the castle of Cabodelo by the Frenchmen, and of
      the discouerie of a rich siluer mine and diuerse other
      important matters.                                             283

    A special note concerning the currents of the sea betweene the
      Cape of Buena Esperança and the coast of Brasilia, giuen by a
      French Pilot to Sir Iohn Yorke knight, before Sebastian Cabote;
      which Pilot had frequented the coasts of Brasilia eighteene
      voyages.                                                       290

    A report of a Voyage of two Englishmen in the company of
      Sebastian Cabota, intended for the Malucos by the Streights of
      Magellan, but perfourmed onely to the riuer of Plate in April
      1527. Taken out of the information of M. Robert Thorne to
      Doctor Ley Ambassador for King Henry the eight, to Charles the
      Emperour, touching the discouery of the Malucos by the North.
                                                                     306

    An extract out of the discourse of one Lopez Vaz a Portugal,
      touching the fight of M. Fenton with the Spanish ships, with a
      report of the proceeding of M. Iohn Drake after his departing
      from him to the riuer of Plate.                                307

    A ruttier which declareth the situation of the coast of Brasil
      from the Isle of Santa Catelina vnto the mouth of the riuer of
      Plata, and all along vp within the sayd riuer, and what armes
      and mouthes it hath to enter into it, as farre as it is
      nauigable with small barks.                                    310


VOL. XIV. PART III.

    A relation of the discouery, which in the Name of God the Fleete
      of the right noble Fernando Cortez Marques of the Vally, made
      with three ships; The one called Santa Agueda of 120. tunnes,
      the other the Trinitie of 35. tunnes, and the thirde S. Thomas
      of the burden of 20. tunnes. Of which Fleete was Captaine the
      right worshipfull knight Francis de Vlloa borne in the Citie of
      Merida. Taken out of the third volume of the voyages gathered
      by M. Iohn Baptista Ramusio.                                   317

    The true and perfect description of a voyage performed and done
      by Francisco de Gualle a Spanish Captaine and Pilot, for the
      Vice-roy of New Spaine, from the hauen of Acapulco in New
      Spaine, to the Islands of the Luçones or Philippinas, vnto the
      Hauen of Manilla, and from thence to the Hauen of Macao in
      China, and from Macao backe againe to Acapulco, accomplished in
      the yeere of our Lord, 1584.                                   378

    The relation of the nauigation and discouery which Captaine
      Fernando Alarchon made by the order of the right honourable
      Lord Don Antonio de Mendoça, Viceroy of New Spaine, dated in
      Colima, an hauen of New Spaine.                                388

    An extract of a Spanish letter written from Pueblo de los Angeles
      in Nueua Espanna in October 1597, touching the discouerie of
      the rich Isles of California, being distant eight dayes sayling
      from the maine.                                                421

    The course which Sir Francis Drake held from the hauen of
      Guatulco in the South sea on the backe side of Nueua Espanna,
      to the North-west of California as far as fourtie three
      degrees: and his returne back along the said Coast to thirtie
      eight degrees: where finding a faire and goodly hauen, he
      landed, and staying there many weekes, and discouering many
      excellent things in the countrey and great shewe of rich
      minerall matter, and being offered the dominion of the countrey
      by the Lord of the same, hee tooke possession thereof in the
      behalfe of her Maiestie, and named it Noua Albion.             421

    Of the large, rich, and beautifull empire of Guiana, with a
      relation of the great and golden citie of Manoa (which the
      spaniards call El Dorado) and the prouinces of Emeria,
      Aromaia, Amapaia, and other countries, with their riuers
      adioyning. Performed in the yeere 1595 by Sir Walter Ralegh
      Knight, captaine of her Maiesties Guard, Lorde Warden of the
      Stanneries, and Her Highnesse Lieutenant Generall of the
      countie of Corne-Wall.                                         428




             NAUIGATIONS, VOYAGES, TRAFFIQUES, AND DISCOUERIES

                                 OF THE

                       ENGLISH NATION IN AMERICA.


                       (Continuation of Part II.)


    Virginia richly valued, by the description of the maine land of
      Florida, her next neighbour: out of the foure yeeres continuall
      trauell and discouerie, for aboue one thousand miles east and
      west, of Don Ferdinando de Soto and sixe hundred able men in his
      companie.--(_Continued._)


                               Chap. XXV.

    How the Gouernour departed from Pacaha to Quigaute, and to Coligoa,
      and came to Cayas.

The Gouernour rested in Pacaha fortie daies. In all which time the two
Caciques serued him with great store of fish, mantles and skinnes, and
stroue who should doe him greatest seruice. At the time of his
departure, the Cacique of Pacaha gaue him two of his sisters, saying
that in signe of loue that hee might remember him, he should take them
for his wiues: the ones name was Macanoche, and the others Mochila; they
were well proportioned, tall of bodie, and well fleshed. Macanoche was
of a good countenance, and in her shape and physiognimie looked like a
Ladie; the other was strongly made. The Casiqui of Casqui commanded the
bridge to be repaired, and the Gouernour returned through his Country,
and lodged in a field neere his towne, whither hee came with great store
of fish, and two women, which hee exchanged with two Christians for
shirts. He gaue vs a guide and men for carriages. The Gouernour lodged
at a towne of his, and the next day at another neere a Riuer, whither he
caused canoes to be brought for him to passe ouer, and with his leaue
returned. The Gouernour tooke his iourney toward Quigaute. The fourth of
August, he came to the towne, where the Cacique vsed to keepe his
residencie: on the way he sent him a present of many mantles and
skinnes, and not daring to stay for him in the towne, he absented
himselfe. The towne was the greatest that was seene in Florida. The
Gouernour and his people lodged in the one halfe of it; and within few
daies, seeing the Indians became liars, he commanded the other halfe to
be burned, because it should not bee a shelter for them, if they came to
assault him by night, nor an hindrance to his horsemen for the resisting
of them. There came an Indian very well accompanied with many Indians,
saying, that he was the Cacique. He deliuered him ouer to the men of his
guard to look vnto him. There went and came many Indians, and brought
mantles and skinnes. The counterfeit Cacique, seeing so little
opportunitie to execute his euill thought, as hee went one day abroad
talking with the Gouernour, he shewed him such a paire of heeles, that
there was no Christian that could ouertake him, and he leaped into the
Riuer, which was a crossebow shot from the towne: and assoone as hee was
on the other side, many Indians that were thereabout making a great crie
began to shoote. [Sidenote: Coligoa neere to certaine mountaines
Northwest.] The Gouernour passed presently ouer to them with horsemen
and footemen, but they durst not tarrie for him. Going forward on his
way, hee came to a towne where the people were fled, and a little
further to a lake, where the horses could not passe, and on the
otherside were many women. The footemen passed, and tooke many of them,
and much spoile. The Gouernour came to the Camp: And that night was a
spie of the Indians taken by them of the watch. The Gouernour asked him,
whether he would bring him where the Cacique was? he said, he would. And
he went presently to seeke him with twentie horsemen, and fiftie
footemen: and after he had sought him a day, and an halfe, hee found him
in a strong wood: And a souldiour not knowing him, gaue him a wound on
the head; and he cried out, that he should not kill him, saying, that he
was the Cacique: so he was taken, and an hundred and fortie of his men
with him. The Gouernour came againe to Quigaute, and willed him to cause
his men to come to serue the Christians: and staying some daies for
their comming, and seeing they came not, he sent two Captaines, euery
one his way on both sides of the Riuer with horsemen and footemen. They
tooke many men and women. Now seeing the hurt which they sustained for
their rebellion, they came to see what the Gouernour would command them,
and passed to and fro many times, and brought presents of cloth and
fish. The Cacique and his two wiues were in the lodging of the Gouernour
loose, and the halbardiers of his guard did keepe them. The Gouernour
asked them which way the Countrie was most inhabited? They said, that
toward the South downe the Riuer, were great townes and Caciques, which
commanded great Countries, and much people: And that toward the
Northwest there was a Prouince neere to certaine mountaines, that was
called Coligoa. The Gouernour and all the rest thought good to goe first
to Coligoa: saying, that peraduenture the mountains would make some
difference of soile, and that beyond them there might be some gold or
siluer: As for Quigaute, Casqui, and Pacaha, they were plaine Countries,
fat grounds, and full of good medowes on the Riuers, where the Indians
sowed large fields of Maiz. From Tascaluca to Rio grande, or the great
Riuer, is about 300. leagues: it is a very low Countrie, and hath many
lakes. From Pacaha to Quigaute may bee an hundred leagues. The Gouernour
left the Cacique of Quigaute in his owne towne: And an Indian, which was
his guide, led him through great woods without any way seuen daies
iournie through a desert, where, at euery lodging, they lodged in lakes
and pooles in verie shold water; there were such store of fish, that
they killed them with cudgils; and the Indians which they carried in
chaines, with the mud troubled the waters, and the fish being therewith,
as it were astonied, came to the top of the water, and they tooke as
much as they listed. The Indians of Coligoa had no knowledge of the
Christians, and when they came so neere the towne, that the Indians saw
them, they fled vp a Riuer, which passed neere the towne, and some
leaped into it; but the Christians went on both sides of the Riuer, and
tooke them. There were many men and women taken, and the Cacique with
them. And by his commandement within three daies came many Indians with
a present of mantles and Deeres skinnes, and two oxe hides: And they
reported, that 5. or 6. leagues from thence toward the North, there
were many of these oxen, and that because the Countrie was cold, it was
euill inhabited. That the best Countrie which they knew, the most
plentifull, and most inhabited, was a Prouince called Cayas, lying
toward the South. From Quiguate to Coligoa may be 40. leagues. This
towne of Coligoa stood at the foote of an hill, on the bank of a meane
Riuer, of the bignesse of Cayas, the Riuer that passeth by Estremadura.
It was a fat soile and so plentifull of Maiz, that they cast out the
old, to bring in the new. There was also great plentie of French beanes
and pompions. The French beanes were greater, and better than those of
Spaine, and likewise the pompions, and being roasted, they haue almost
the taste of chesnuts. The Cacique of Coligoa gaue a guide to Cayas, and
staied behind in his owne towne. Wee trauelled fiue daies, and came to
the Prouince of Palisema. The house of the Cacique was found couered
with Deeres skinnes of Diuers colours and works drawne in them, and with
the same in manner of carpets was the ground of the house couered. The
Cacique left it so, that the Gouernour might lodge in it, in token that
he sought peace and his friendship. But hee durst not tarrie his
comming. The Gouernour, seeing he had absented himselfe, sent a Captaine
with horsemen and footemen to seeke him. Hee found much people, but by
reason of the roughnesse of the Countrie, he tooke none saue a few women
and children. The towne was little and scattering, and had very little
Maiz. For which cause the Gouernour speedilie departed from thence. Hee
came to another towne called Tatalicoya, hee carried with him the
Cacique thereof, which guided him to Cayas. From Tatalicoya are foure
daies iournie to Cayas. When hee came to Cayas, and saw the towne
scattered; hee thought they had told him a lie, and that it was not the
Prouince of Cayas, because they had informed him that it was well
inhabited: He threatned the Cacique, charging him to tell him where hee
was: and he and other Indians which were taken neere about that place,
affirmed that this was the towne of Cayas, and the best that was in that
Countrie, and that though the houses were distant the one from the
other, yet the ground that was inhabited was great, and that there was
great store of people, and many fields of Maiz. The towne was called
Tanico: he pitched his Campe in the best part of it neere vnto a Riuer.
The same day that the Gouernour came thither, he went a league farther
with certaine horsemen, and without finding any people, hee found many
skinnes in a pathway, which the Cacique had left there, that they might
bee found, in token of peace. For so is the custome in that Countrie.


                               Chap. XXVI.

    How the Gouernour discouered the Prouince of Tulla, and what
      happened vnto him.

The Gouernour rested a moneth in the Prouince of Cayas. In which time
the horses fattened and thriued more, then in other places in a longer
time, with the great plentie of Maiz and the leaues thereof, which I
thinke was the best that hath been seene, and they dranke of a lake of
very hot water, and somewhat brackish, and they dranke so much, that it
swelled in their bellies when they brought them from the watering.
Vntill that time the Christians wanted salt, and there they made good
store, which they carried along with them. The Indians doe carrie it to
other places to exchange it for skinnes and mantles. They make it along
the Riuer, which when it ebbeth, leaueth it vpon the vpper part of the
sand. And because they cannot make it, without much sand mingled with
it, they throw it into certaine baskets which they haue for that
purpose, broad at the mouth, and narrow at the bottom, and set it in the
aire vpon a barre, and throw water into it, and set a small vessell
vnder it, wherein it falleth: "Being strained and set to boile vpon the
fire, when the water is sodden away, the salt remaineth in the bottome
of the pan." On both sides of the Riuer the Countrie was full of sowne
fields, and there was store of Maiz. The Indians durst not come ouer
where wee were: and when some of them shewed themselues, the souldiers
that saw them called vnto them; then the Indians passed the Riuer, and
came with them where the Gouernor was. He asked them for the Cacique.
They said, that he remained quiet, but that he durst not shew himselfe.
The Gouernour presently sent him word, that he should come vnto him, and
bring him a guide and an interpretour for his iournie, if he made
account of his friendship: and if he did not so, he would come himselfe
to seeke him, and that it would be the worse for him. Hee waited three
daies, and seeing he came not, he went to seeke him, and brought him
prisoner with 150. of his men. He asked him whether hee had notice of
any great Cacique, and which way the Countrie was best inhabited. Hee
answered, that the best Countrie thereabout was a Prouince toward the
South, a day and an halfes iournie, which was called Tulla; and that he
could giue him a guide, but no interpretour, because the speech of that
Countrie was different from his, and because he and his ancestors had
alwaies warres with the Lords of that Prouince: therefore they had no
commerce, nor vnderstood one anothers language. Immediatly the Gouernour
with certaine horsemen, and 50. footemen, departed toward Tulla, to see
if the Countrie were such, as hee might passe through it with all his
companie: and assoone as hee arriued there, and was espied of the
Indians, the Countrie gathered together, and assoone as 15. or 20.
Indians could assemble themselues, they set vpon the Christians: and
seeing that they did handle them shrewdly, and that the horsemen
ouertooke them when they fled, they gat vp into the tops of their
houses, and sought to defend themselues with their arrowes: and being
beaten downe from one, they gat vp vpon another. And while our men
pursued some, others set vpon them another way. Thus the skirmish lasted
so long, that the horses were tired, and they could not make them runne.
The Indians killed there one horse, and some were hurt. There were 15.
Indians slaine there, and 40. women and boies were taken prisoners. For
whatsoeuer Indian did shoot at them, if they could come by him, they put
him to the sword. The Gouernour determined to returne toward Cayas,
before the Indians had time to gather a head; and presently that
euening, going part of the night to leaue Tulla, he lodged by the way,
and the next day came to Cayas: and within three daies after he departed
thence toward Tulla with all his companie: He carried the Cacique along
with him, and among all his men, there was not one found that could
vnderstand the speech of Tulla. He staied three daies by the way, and
the day that he came thither, he found the towne abandoned: for the
Indians durst not tarrie his comming. But assoone as they knew that the
Gouernour was in Tulla, the first night about the morning watch, they
came in two squadrons two seuerall waies, with their bowes and arrowes,
and long staues like pikes. Assoone as they were descried, both horse
and foot sallied out vpon them, where many of the Indians were slaine:
And some Christians and horses were hurt: Some of the Indians were taken
prisoners, whereof the Gouernour sent sixe to the Cacique, with their
right hands and noses cut off: and sent him word, that if he came not
to him to excuse and submit himselfe, that hee would come to seeke him,
and that hee would doe the like to him, and as many of his as hee could
find, as hee had done to those which hee had sent him: and gaue him
three daies respit for to come. And this he gaue them to vnderstand by
signes, as well as hee could, for there was no interpretour. At the
three daies end, there came an Indian laden with Oxe hides. He came
weeping with great sobs, and comming to the Gouernour cast himselfe
downe at his feet: He tooke him vp, and he made a speech, but there was
none that vnderstood him. The Gouernour by signes commanded him, to
returne to the Cacique, and to will him, to send him an interpretor,
which could vnderstand the men of Cayas. The next day came three Indians
laden with oxe hides; and within three daies after came 20. Indians, and
among them one that vnderstood them of Cayas: Who, after a long oration
of excuses of the Cacique, and praises of the Gouernour, concluded with
this, that he and the other were come thither on the Caciques behalfe,
to see what his Lordship would command him to doe, for he was readie at
his commandement. The Gouernour and all his companie were verie glad.
For in no wise could they trauell without an interpretour. The Gouernour
commanded him to be kept safe, and bad him tell the men that came with
him, that they should returne to the Cacique, and signifie vnto him,
that he pardoned him for that which was past, and thanked him much for
his presents and interpretour, which he had sent him, and that he would
bee glad to see him, and that he should come the next day to talke with
him. [Sidenote: The Cacique of Tulla.] After three daies, the Cacique
came, and 80. Indians with him: and himselfe and his men came weeping
into the Camp, in token of obedience and repentance for the errour
passed, after the manner of that Countrie: He brought a present of many
oxe hides: which, because the Countrie was cold, were verie profitable,
and serued for couerlets, because they were very soft, and wolled like
sheepe. Not farre from thence toward the North were many oxen.
[Sidenote: Gomara Histor. Gener. cap. 215.] The Christians saw them not,
nor came into the Countrie where they were, because those parts were
euil inhabited, and had small store of Maiz where they were bred. The
Cacique of Tulla made an oration to the Gouernour, wherein he excused
himselfe, and offered him his Countrie, subiects, and person. Aswell
this Cacique as the others, and all those which came to the Gouernour
on their behalfe, deliuered their message or speech in so good order,
that no oratour could vtter the same more eloquentlie.


                              Chap. XXVII.

    How the Gouernour went from Tulla to Autiamque, where he passed the
      winter.

The Gouernour enformed himselfe of all the Countrie round about: and
vnderstood, that toward the West was a scattered dwelling, and that
toward the Southeast were great townes, especially in a Prouince called
Autiamque, tenne daies iournie from Tulla; which might be about 80.
leagues; and that it was a plentifull Countrie of Maiz. And because
winter came on, and they could not trauell two or three moneths in the
yeere for cold, waters, and snow: and fearing, that if they should stay
so long in the scattered dwelling, they could not be susteined; and also
because the Indians said, that neere to Autiamque was a great water, and
according to their relation, the Gouernour thought it was some arme of
the Sea: And because he now desired to send newes of himselfe to Cuba,
that some supplie of men and horses might be sent vnto him: (for it was
aboue three yeeres, since Donna Isabella, which was in Hauana, or any
other person in Christendome had heard of him, and by this time he had
lost 250. men, and 150. horses) he determined to winter in Autiamque,
and the next spring, to goe to the sea coast, and make two brigantines,
and send one of them to Cuba, and the other to Nueua Espanna, and that
which went in safetie, might giue newes of him: Hoping with the goods
which he had in Cuba, to furnish himselfe againe, and to attempt the
discouery and conquest toward the West: for he had not yet come where
Cabeça de Vaca had been. [Sidenote: Quipana, fiue daies iournie from
Tulla.] Thus hauing sent away the two Caciques of Cayas and Tulla, he
tooke his iournie toward Autiamque: Hee trauelled fiue daies ouer very
rough mountaines, and came to a towne called Quipana, where no Indians
could be taken for the toughnesse of the Countrie: and the towne being
betweene hilles, there was an ambush laid, wherewith they tooke two
Indians; which told them, that Autiamque was sixe daies iournie from
thence, and that their was another Prouince toward the South, eight
daies iournie off, plentiful of Maiz, and very well peopled, which was
called Guahate. But because Autiamque was neerer, and the most of the
Indians agreed of it, the Gouernour made his iournie that way. In three
daies he came to a towne called Anoixi. He sent a Captaine before with
30. horsemen, and 50. footemen, and tooke the Indians carelesse, hee
tooke many men and women prisoners. Within two daies after the Gouernour
came to another towne called Catamaya, and lodged in the fields of the
towne. Two Indians came with a false message from the Cacique to know
his determination. Hee bad them tell their Lord, that hee should come
and speake with him. The Indians returned and came no more, nor any
other message from the Cacique. The next day the Christians went to the
towne, which was without people: they tooke as much Maiz as they needed.
That day they lodged in a wood, and the next day they came to Autiamque.
[Sidenote: Autiamque sixe daies iournie from Quipana.] They found much
Maiz laid vp in store, and French beanes, and walnuts, and prunes, great
store of all sorts. They tooke some Indians which were gathering
together the stuffe which their wiues had hidden. This was a champion
Countrie, and well inhabited. The Gouernour lodged in the best part of
the towne, and commanded presently to make a fense of timber round about
the Campe distant from the houses, that the Indians might not hurt them
without by fire. And measuring the ground by pases, hee appointed euery
one his part to doe according to the number of Indians which he had:
presently the timber was brought by them: and in three daies there was
an inclosure made of very hie and thicke posts thrust into the ground,
and many railes laid acrosse. Hard by this towne passed a Riuer, that
came out of the Prouince of Cayas: and aboue and beneath it was very
well peopled. Thither came Indians on the Caciques behalfe with a
present of mantles and skinnes; and an halting Cacique, subiect to the
Lord of Autiamque, Lord of a towne called Tietiquaquo, came many times
to visit the Gouernour, and to bring him presents of such as hee had.
The Cacique of Autiamque sent to know of the Gouernour, how long time
hee meant to stay in this Countrie? And vnderstanding that he meant to
stay aboue three daies, he neuer sent any more Indians, nor any other
message, but conspired with the lame Cacique to rebell. Diuers inrodes
were made, wherein there were many men and women taken, and the lame
Cacique among the rest. The Gouernour respecting the seruices which he
had receiued of him, reprehended and admonished him, and set him at
libertie, and gaue him two Indians to carrie him in a chaire vpon their
shoulders. The Cacique of Autiamque desiring to thrust the Gouernour out
of his Countrie, set spies ouer him. And an Indian comming one night to
the gate of the inclosure, a soldier that watched espied him, and
stepping behind the gate, as he came in, he gaue him such a thrust, that
he fell downe; and so he carried him to the Gouernour: and as he asked
him wherefore he came, not being able to speake, hee fell downe dead.
[Sidenote: Great prouidence.] The night following the Gouernour
commanded a souldiour to giue the alarme, and to say that he had seene
Indians, to see how ready they would be to answere the alarme. And hee
did so sometimes as well there, as in other places, when he thought that
his men were carelesse, and reprehended such as were slacke. And as well
for this cause, as in regard of doing their dutie, when the alarme was
giuen, euery one sought to be the first that should answere. They staied
in Autiamque three moneths with great plentie of Maiz, French beanes,
Walnuts, Prunes, and Conies: which vntill that time they knew not how to
catch. And in Autiamque the Indians taught them how to take them: which
was, with great springes, which lifted vp their feete from the ground:
And the snare was made with a strong string, whereunto was fastened a
knot of a cane, which ran close about the neck of the conie, because
they should not gnaw the string. They tooke many in the fields of Maiz,
especiallie when it freesed or snowed. The Christians staied there one
whole moneth so inclosed with snow, that they went not out of the towne:
and when they wanted firewood, the Gouernour with his horsemen going and
coming many times to the wood, which was two crossebow shot from the
towne, made a pathway, whereby the footemen went for wood. In this meane
space, some Indians which went loose, killed many conies with their
giues, and with arrowes. These conies were of two sorts, some were like
those of Spaine, and the other of the same colour and fashion, and as
big as great Hares, longer, and hauing greater loines.


                              Chap. XXVIII.

    How the Gouernour went from Autiamque to Nilco, and from thence to
      Guacoya.

Vpon Monday the sixt of March 1542, the Gouernour departed from
Autiamque to seeke Nilco, which the Indians said was neere the Great
riuer, with determination to come to the Sea, and procure some succour
of men and horses: for hee had now but three hundred men of warre, and
fortie horses, and some of them lame, which did nothing but helpe to
make vp the number: and for want of iron they had gone aboue a yeere
vnshod: and because they were vsed to it in the plaine countrie, it did
them no great harme. [Sidenote: The death of Iohn Ortiz, and the great
misse of him being their interpretour.] Iohn Ortiz died in Autiamque;
which grieued the Gouernour very much: because that without an
Interpretour hee feared to enter farre into the land, where he might be
lost. From thence forward a youth that was taken in Cutifachiqui did
serue for Interpretour, which had by that time learned somewhat of the
Christians language. The death of Iohn Ortiz was so great a mischiefe
for the discouering inward, or going out of the land, that to learne of
the Indians, that which in foure words hee declared, they needed a whole
day with the youth: and most commonly hee vnderstood quite contrarie
that which was asked him: whereby it often happened that the way that
they went one day, and sometimes two or three daies, they turned backe,
and went astray through the wood here and there. The Gouernour spent ten
daies in trauelling from Autiamque to a prouince called Ayays; and came
to a towne that stood neere the Riuer that passeth by Cayas and
Autiamque. There hee commanded a barge to be made, wherewith he passed
the Riuer. [Sidenote: Great snow about the twentieth of March.] When he
had passed the Riuer there fell out such weather, that foure daies he
could not trauell for snow. Assoone as it gaue ouer snowing, hee went
three daies iourney through a Wildernesse, and a countrie so low, and so
full of lakes and euill waies, that hee trauelled one time a whole day
in water, sometimes knee deepe, sometimes to the stirrup, and sometimes
they swamme. He came to a towne called Tutelpinco, abandoned, and
without Maiz: there passed by it a lake, that entered into the riuer,
which carried a great streame and force of water. Fiue Christians
passing ouer it in a periagua, which the Gouernour had sent with a
Captaine, the periagua ouerset: some tooke hold on it, some on the trees
that were in the lake. One Francis Sebastian, an honest man of Villa
noua de Barca Rota, was drowned there. The Gouernour went a whole day
along the lake seeking passage, and could finde none, nor any way that
did passe to the other side. Comming againe at night to the towne hee
found two peaceable Indians, which shewed him the passage, and which way
hee was to goe. There they made of canes and of the timber of houses
thatched with canes, rafts wherewith they passed the lake. They
trauelled three daies, and came to a towne of the territorie of Nilco,
called Tianto. There they tooke thirtie Indians, and among them two
principall men of this towne. The Gouernour sent a Captaine with
horsemen and footmen before to Nilco, because the Indians might haue no
time to carrie away the provision. They passed through three or foure
great townes; and in the towne where the Cacique was resident, which was
two leagues from the place where the Gouernour remained, they found many
Indians with their bowes and arrowes, in manner as though they would
haue staied to fight, which did compasse the towne; and assoone as they
saw the Christians come neere them without misdoubting them, they set
the Caciques house on fire, and fled ouer a lake that passed neere the
towne, through which the horses could not passe. The next day being
Wednesday the 29. of March the Gouernour came to Nilco: he lodged with
all his men in the Caciques towne, which stood in a plaine field, which
was inhabited for the space of a quarter of a league: and within a
league and halfe a league were other very great townes, wherein was
great store of Maiz, of French beanes, of Walnuts, and Prunes.
[Sidenote: The best Countrie of Florida.] This was the best inhabited
countrie, that was seene in Florida, and had most store of Maiz, except
Coca, and Apalache. There came to the campe an Indian, accompanied with
others, and in the Caciques name gaue the Gouernour a mantle of Marterns
skinnes, and a cordon of perles. The Gouernour gaue him a few small
Margarites, which are certaine beades much esteemed in Peru, and other
things, wherewith he was very well contented. He promised to returne
within two daies, but neuer came againe: but on the contrarie the
Indians came by night in canoes, and carried away all the Maiz they
could, and made them cabins on the other side of the Riuer in the
thickest of the wood, because they might flee if wee should goe to seeke
them. The Gouernour seeing hee came not at the time appointed, commanded
an ambush to be laid about certaine store-houses neere the lake, whither
the Indians came for Maiz: where they tooke two Indians, who told the
Gouernour, that hee which came to visit him, was not the Cacique, but
was sent by him vnder pretence to spie whether the Christians were
carelesse, and whether they determined to settle in that country or to
goe forward. Presently the Gouernour sent a Captaine with footmen and
horsemen ouer the riuer; and in their passage they were descried of the
Indians, and therefore he could take but tenne or twelue men and women,
with whom hee returned to the campe. This Riuer which passed by Nilco,
was that which passed by Cayas and Autiamque, and fell into Rio grande,
or the Great Riuer, which passed by Pachaha and Aquixo neere vnto the
prouince of Guachoya: and the Lord thereof came vp the Riuer in canoes
to make warre with him of Nilco. On his behalf there came an Indian to
the Gouernour and said vnto him, That he was his seruant, and prayed him
so to hold him, and that within two daies hee would come to kisse his
Lordships hands: and at the time appointed he came with some of his
principal Indians, which accompanied him, and with words of great offers
and courtesie hee gaue the Gouernour a present of many mantles and
Deeres skinnes. The Gouernour gaue him some other things in recompense,
and honoured him much. Hee asked him what townes there were downe the
Riuer? He answered that he knew none other but his owne: and on the
other side of the Riuer a prouince of a Cacique called Quigalta. So hee
tooke his leaue of the Gouernour and went to his owne towne. Within few
daies the Gouernour determined to goe to Guachoya, to learne there
whether the Sea were neere, or whether there were any habitation neere,
where hee might relieue his companie, while the brigantines were making,
which he meant to send to the land of the Christians. As he passed the
Riuer of Nilco, there came in canoes Indians of Guachoya vp the streame,
and when they saw him, supposing that he came to seeke them to doe them
some hurt, they returned downe the Riuer, and informed the Cacique
thereof: who with all his people, spoiling the towne of all that they
could carrie away, passed that night ouer to the other side of Rio grande,
or the Great Riuer. The [Sidenote: Foure names of Rio grande.] Gouernour
sent a Captaine with fiftie men in sixe canoes downe the Riuer, and went
himselfe by land with the rest: hee came to Guachoya vpon Sunday the 17.
of April: he lodged in the towne of the Cacique, which was inclosed about,
and seated a crossebow shot distant from the Riuer. Here the Riuer is
called Tamaliseu, and in Nilco Tapatu, and in Coça Mico, and in the port
or mouth Ri.


                               Chap. XXIX.

    Of the message which the Gouernour sent to Quigalta, and of the
      answere which he returned; and of the things which happened in
      this time.

As soone as the Gouernour come to Guachoya, hee sent Iohn Danusco with
as many men as could goe in the canoes vp the Riuer. For when they came
downe from Nilco, they saw on the other side the Riuer new cabins made.
Iohn Danusco went and brought the canoes loden with Maiz, French beanes,
Prunes, and many loaues made of the substance of prunes. That day came
an Indian to the Gouernour from the Cacique of Guachoya, and said, that
his Lord would come the next day. The next day they saw many canoes come
vp the Riuer, and on the other side of the great Riuer, they assembled
together in the space of an houre: they consulted whether they should
come or not; and at length concluded to come, and crossed the Riuer. In
them came the Cacique of Guachoya, and brought with him manie Indians
with great store of Fish, Dogges, Deeres skinnes, and Mantles: And
assoone as they landed, they went to the lodging of the Gouernour, and
presented him their gifts, and the Cacique vttered these words:

Mightie and excellent Lord, I beseech your Lordship to pardon mee the
errour which I committed in absenting my selfe, and not tarrying in this
towne to haue receiued and serued your Lordship; since, to obtaine this
opportunitie of time, was, and is as much as a great victorie to me. But
I feared that, which I needed not to haue feared, and so did that which
was not reason to do; But as haste maketh waste, and I remoued without
deliberation; so, as soone as I thought on it, I determined not to
follow the opinion of the foolish, which is, to continue in their
errour; but to imitate the wise and discreet, in changing my counsell,
and so I came to see what your Lordship will command me to doe, that I
may serue you in all things that are in my power.

The Gouernour receiued him with much ioy, and gaue him thankes for his
present and offer. He asked him, whether hee had any notice of the Sea.
Hee answered, no, nor of any townes downe the Riuer on that side; saue
that two leagues from thence was one towne of a principall Indian a
subiect of his; and on the other side of the Riuer, three daies iourney
from thence downe the Riuer, was the Prouince of Quigalta, which was the
greatest Lord that was in that Countrie. The Gouernour thought that the
Cacique lied vnto him, to rid him out of his owne townes, and sent Iohn
Danusco with eight horsemen downe the Riuer, to see what habitation
there was, and to informe himselfe, if there were any notice of the Sea.
Hee trauelled eight daies, and at his returne hee said, that in all that
time he was not able to go aboue 14. or 15. leagues, because of the
great creekes that came out of the Riuer, and groues of canes, and
thicke woods that were along the banks of the Riuer, and that hee had
found no habitation. [Sidenote: The Gouernor falleth sick of thought.]
The Gouernour fell into great dumps to see how hard it was to get to the
Sea: and worse, because his men and horses euery day diminished, being
without succour to sustaine themselues in the country: and with that
thought he fell sick. But before he tooke his bed hee sent an Indian to
the Cacique at Quigalta to tell him, that hee was the Childe of the
Sunne, and that all the way that hee came all men obeyed and serued him,
that he requested him to accept of his friendship, and come vnto him;
for he would be very glad to see him; and in signe of loue and obedience
to bring something with him of that which in his countrie was most
esteemed. The Cacique answered by the same Indian:

[Sidenote: A most wittie and stout answere of the Cacique of Quigalta.]
That whereas he said he was the Child of the Sunne, if he would drie vp
the Riuer he would beleeue him: and touching the rest, that he was wont
to visit none; but rather that all those of whom he had notice did visit
him, serued, obeyed and paid him tributes willingly or perforce:
therefore if hee desired to see him, it were best he should come
thither: that if hee came in peace, he would receiue him with speciall
good will; and if in warre, in like manner hee would attend him in the
towne where he was, and that for him or any other hee would not shrinke
one foote backe.

By that time the Indian returned with this answere, the Gouernour had
betaken himselfe to bed, being euill handled with feuers, and was much
agrieued, that he was not in case to passe presently the Riuer and to
seeke him, to see if he could abate that pride of his, considering the
Riuer went now very strongly in those parts; for it was neere halfe a
league broad, and 16. fathomes deep, and very furious, and ranne with a
great current; and on both sides there were many Indians, and his power
was not now so great, but that hee had need to helpe himselfe rather by
slights then by force. The Indians of Guachoya came euery day with fish
in such numbers, that the towne was full of them. The Cacique said, that
on a certaine night hee of Quigalta would come to giue battell to the
Gouernour. Which the Gouernour imagined that he had deuised, to driue
him out of his countrey, and commanded him to bee put in hold: and that
night and all the rest, there was good watch kept. Hee asked him
wherefore Quigalta came not? He said that hee came, but that he saw him
prepared, and therefore durst not giue the attempt: and hee was earnest
with him to send his Captaines ouer the Riuer, and that he would aide
him with many men to set vpon Quigalta. The Gouernour told him that
assoone as he was recouered, himselfe would seeke him out. And seeing
how many Indians came daily to the towne, and what store of people was
in that countrie, fearing they should al conspire together and plot some
treason against him; and because the towne had some open gaps which were
not made an end of inclosing, besides the gates which they went in and
out by: because the Indians should not thinke he feared them, he let
them all alone vnrepaired; and commanded the horsemen to be appointed to
them, and to the gates: and all night the horsemen went the round; and
two and two of euery squadron rode about, and visited the skouts that
were without the towne in their standings by the passages, and the
crossebowmen that kept the canoes in the Riuer. And because the Indians
should stand in feare of him, hee determined to send a Captaine to
Nilco, for those of Guachoya had told him that it was inhabited; that by
vsing them cruelly, neither the one nor the other should presume to
assaile him; and hee sent Nunnez de Touar with fifteene horsemen, and
Iohn de Guzman Captaine of the footmen with his companie, in canoes vp
the Riuer. The Cacique of Guachoya sent for many canoes and many warlike
Indians to goe with the Christians: and the Captaine of the Christians,
called Nunnez de Touar, went by land with his horsemen, and two leagues
before he came to Nilco hee staied for Iohn de Guzman, and in that place
they passed the Riuer by night: the horsemen came first, and in the
morning by breake of day in sight of the towne they lighted upon a spie;
which assoone as he perceiued the Christians, crying out amaine fled to
the towne to giue warning. Nunnez de Touar and his companie made such
speed, that before the Indians of the towne could fully come out, they
were vpon them: it was champion ground that was inhabited, which was
about a quarter of a league. [Sidenote: Five or sixe thousand people in
Nilco.] There were about fiue or sixe thousand people in the towne: and,
as many people came out of the houses, and fled from one house to
another, and many Indians came flocking together from all parts, there
was neuer a horseman that was not alone among many. The Captaine had
commanded that they should not spare the life of any male. Their
disorder was so great, that there was no Indian that shot an arrow at
any Christian. The shreekes of women and children were so great, that
they made the eares deafe of those that followed them. There were slaine
an hundred Indians, little more or lesse: and many were wounded with
great wounds, whom they suffered to escape to strike a terror in the
rest that were not there. There were some so cruell and butcherlike,
that they killed old and young, and all that they met, though they made
no resistance: and those which presumed of themselues for their valour,
and were taken for such, brake through the Indians, bearing downe many
with their stirrops and brests of their horses; and some they wounded
with their lances, and so let them goe: and when they saw any youth or
woman they tooke them, and deliuered them to the footmen. "These mens
sinnes by Gods permission lighted on their own heads: who, because they
would seeme valiant, became cruell; shewing themselues extreme cowards
in the sight of all men, when as most neede of valour was required, and,
afterward[1] they came to a shameful death." Of the Indians of Nilco
were taken prisoners, fourescore women and children, and much spoile.
The Indians of Guachoya kept back before they came at the towne, and
staied without, beholding the successe of the Christians with the men of
Nilco. And when they saw them put to flight, and the horsemen busie in
killing of them, they hastened to the houses to rob, and filled their
canoes with the spoile of the goods; and returned to Guachoya before the
Christians; and wondring much at the sharpe dealing which they had seene
them vse toward the Indians of Nilco, they told their Cacique all that
had passed with great astonishment.

[1] Chap. 37.


                               Chap. XXX.

    Of the death of the Adelantado Fernando de Soto: And how Aluarado
      was elected Gouernour in his stead.

The Gouernour felt in himselfe that the houre approched, wherein hee was
to leaue this present life, and called for the Kings officers, Captaines
and principall persons, to whom he made a speech, saying:

That now he was to goe to giue an account before the presence of God of
all his life past: and since it pleased him to take him in such a time,
and that the time was come that he knew his death, that he his most
vnworthie seruant did yeeld him many thankes therefore; and desired all
that were present and absent (whom he confessed himselfe to be much
beholding vnto for their singular vertues, loue and loyaltie, which
himselfe had well tried in the trauels, which they had suffered, which
alwaies in his mind he did hope to satisfie and reward, when it should
please God to giue him rest, with more prosperitie of his estate,) that
they would pray to God for him, that for his mercie he would forgiue him
his sinnes, and receiue his soule into eternall glorie: and that they
would quit and free him of the charge which hee had ouer them, and ought
vnto them all, and that they would pardon him for some wrongs which they
might haue receiued of him: And to auoid some diuision, which vpon his
death might fall out vpon the choice of his successour, he requested
them to elect a principall person, and able to gouerne, of whom all
should like well; and when he was elected, they should sweare before him
to obey him: and that he would thanke them very much in so doing;
because the griefe that he had, would somewhat be asswaged, and the
paine that he felt, because he left them in so great confusion, to wit,
in leauing them in a strange Countrie, where they knew not where they
were.

Baltasar de Gallegos answered in the name of all the rest: And first of
all comforting him, he set before his eies how short the life of this
world was, and with how many troubles and miseries it is accompanied,
and how God shewed him a singular fauor which soonest left it: telling
him many other things fit for such a time. And for the last point, that
since it pleased God to take him to himselfe, although his death did
justly grieue them much, yet as wel he, as al the rest, ought of
necessitie to conforme themselues to the will of God. And touching the
Gouernour which he commanded they should elect, he besought him, that it
would please his Lordship to name him which he thought fit, and him they
would obey. And presently he named Luys de Moscoso de Aluarado his
Captaine generall. And presently he was sworne by all that were present
and elected for Gouernour. [Sidenote: The death of Don Ferdinando de
Soto the 21. of May, 1542 at Guacoya.] The next day, being the 21. of
May, 1542. departed out of this life, the valorous, virtuous, and
valiant Captaine, Don Fernando de Soto, Gouernour of Cuba, and
Adelantado of Florida: whom fortune aduanced, as it vseth to doe others,
that hee might haue the higher fal. He departed in such a place, and at
such time, as in his sicknesse he had but little comfort; and the danger
wherein all his people were of perishing in that Countrie, which
appeared before their eies, was cause sufficient, why euery one of them
had need of comfort, and why they did not visit nor accompanie him as
they ought to haue done. Luys de Moscoso determined to conceale his
death from the Indians, because Ferdinando de Soto had made them
beleeue, That the Christians were immortall; and also because they tooke
him to be hardie, wise, and valiant: and if they should know that he was
dead, they would bee bold to set vpon the Christians, though they liued
peaceablie by them. [Sidenote: A wittie stratagem.] In regard of their
disposition, and because they were nothing constant, and beleeued all
that was tolde them, the Adelantado made them beleeue, that he knew some
things that passed in secret among themselues, without their knowledge,
how, or in what manner he came by them: and that the figure which
appeared in a glasse, which he shewed them, did tell him whatsoeuer they
practised and went about: and therefore neither in word nor deed durst
they attempt any thing that might bee preiudiciall vnto him.

Assoone as he was dead, Luis de Moscoso commanded to put him secretly in
an house, where hee remained three daies: and remoouing him from thence,
commanded him to bee buried in the night at one of the gates of the
towne within the wall. And as the Indians had seene him sick, and missed
him, so did they suspect what might bee. And passing by the place where
hee was buried, seeing the earth mooued, they looked and spake one to
another. Luys de Moscoso vnderstanding of it, commanded him to be taken
vp, by night, and to cast a great deale of sand into the mantles,
wherein he was winded vp, wherein hee was carried in a canoe, and
throwne into the middest of the Riuer. The Cacique of Guachoya inquired
for him, demanding what was become of his brother and Lord, the
Gouernour: Luys de Moscoso told him, that hee was gon to heauen, as many
other times hee did: and because hee was to stay there certaine daies
hee had left him in his place. The Cacique thought with himselfe that he
was dead; and commanded two young and well proportioned Indians to be
brought thither; [Sidenote: This is also the costome of the old
Tartars.] and said, that the vse of that Countrie was, when any Lord
died, to kill Indians to wait vpon him, and serue him by the way: and
for that purpose by his commandement were those come thither: and prayed
Luys de Moscoso to command them to be beheaded, that they might attend
and serue his Lord and brother. Luys de Moscoso told him, that the
Gouernour was not dead, but gone to heauen, and that of his owne
Christian souldiers, he had taken such as he needed, to serue him, and
praied him to command those Indians to be loosed and not to vse any such
bad custome from thencefoorth: straightway hee commanded them to be
loosed, and to get them home to their houses. And one of them would not
goe; saying, that hee would not serue him, that without desert had
judged him to death, but that hee would serue him as long as hee liued,
which had saued his life. [Sidenote: Seven hundred hogges.] Luys de
Moscoso caused all the goods of the Gouernor to be sold at an outcrie:
to wit, two men slaues, and two women slaues, and three horses, and 700.
hogges. For euery slaue or horse, they gaue two or three thousand
ducats: which were to be paied at the first melting of gold or siluer,
or at the diuision of their portion of inheritance. And they entered
into bonds, though in the Countrie there was not wherewith, to pay it
within a yeere after, and put in sureties for the same. Such as in
Spaine had no goods to bind, gaue two hundred ducats for an hog, giuing
assurance after the same maner. Those which had any goods in Spaine,
bought with more feare, and bought the lesse. From that time forward,
most of the companie had swine, and brought them vp, and fed vpon them;
and obserued Fridaies and Saturdaies, and the euenings of feasts, which
before they did not. For sometimes in two or three moneths they did eate
no flesh, and whensoeuer they could come by it, they did eate it.


                               Chap. XXXI.

    How the Gouernour Luys de Moscoso departed from Guachoya, and went
      to Chaguate; and thence to Aguacay.

Some were glad of the death of Don Ferdinando de Soto, holding for
certaine, that Luys de Moscoso (which was giuen to his ease) would
rather desire to be among the Christians at rest, then to continue the
labours of the warre in subduing and discouering of Countries; whereof
they were alreadie wearie, seeing the small profit that insued thereof.
The Gouernour commanded the Captaines and principall persons to meet to
consult and determine what they should doe. And being informed what
peopled habitation was round about, he vnderstood that to the West, the
Countrie was most inhabited, and that downe the Riuer beyond Quigalta
was vninhabited, and had little store of food. He desired them all, that
euerie one would giue his opinion in writing, and set his hand to it:
that they might resolue by generall consent, whether they should goe
downe the Riuer, or enter into the maine land. [Sidenote: Their general
resolution to trauell by land Westward.] All were of opinion, that it
was best to go by land toward the West, because Nueua Espanna was that
way: holding the voyage by sea more dangerous, and of greater hazard,
because they could make no ship of any strength to abide a storme,
neither had they Master, nor Pilot, Compasse, nor Chart, neither knew
they how farre the sea was off, nor had any notice of it: nor whether
the Riuer did make any great turning into the land, or had any great
fall the rocks, where all of them might be cast away. And some which had
seene the sea-chart, did find, that from the place where they were by
the sea coast to Noua Espanna, might bee 400. leagues, little more or
lesse; and said, that though they went somewhat about by land in seeking
a peopled Countrie, if some great wildernesse which they could not passe
did not hinder them, by spending that sommer in trauell, finding
prouision to passe the winter in some peopled Countrie, that the next
summer after they might come to some Christian land, and that it might
fortune in their trauel by land to find some rich Countrie, where they
might doe themselves good. The Gouernour, although he desired to get out
of Florida in shorter time, seeing the inconueniences they laid before
him in trauelling by sea, determined to follow that which seemed good
to them all. On Monday the fifth of Iune, he departed from Guachoya. The
Cacique gaue him a guide to Chaguate, and staied at home in his owne
towne. They passed through a prouince called Catalte: and hauing passed
a wildernesse of sixe daies iournie, the twentieth day of the moneth he
came to Chaguate. The Cacique of this Prouince had visited the Gouernour
Don Ferdinando de Soto at Autiamque, whither he brought him presents of
skinnes, and mantles and salt. And a day before Luys de Moscoso came to
his towne, we lost a Christian that was sicke; which hee suspected that
the Indians had slaine. Hee sent the Cacique word, that he should
command his people to seeke him vp, and send him vnto him, and that he
would hold him, as he did, for his friend: and if he did not, that
neither he, nor his, should escape his hands, and that hee would set his
Countrie on fire. Presently the Cacique came vnto him, and brought a
great present of mantles and skinnes, and the Christian that was lost,
and made this speech following:

Right excellent Lord, I would not deserue that conceit which you had of
me, for all the treasure of the world. What inforced me to goe to visit
and serue the excellent Lord Gouernour your father in Autiamque, which
you should haue remembred, where I offered my selfe with all loyaltie,
faith and loue, during my life to serue and obey him? What then could be
the cause, I hauing receiued fauours of him, and neither you nor he
hauing done me any wrong, that should mooue me to doe the thing, which I
ought not? Beleeue this of mee, that neither wrong, nor any worldly
interest, was able to make me to haue done it, nor shall be able to
blind me. But as in this life it is a naturall course, that after one
pleasure, many sorrowes doe follow: so by your indignation, fortune
would moderate the ioy, which my heart conceiueth with your presence;
and that I should erre, where I thought surest to haue hit the marke; in
harboring this Christian which was lost, and vsing him in such manner,
as he may tell himselfe, thinking that herin I did you service, with
purpose to deliuer him vnto you in Chaguate, and to serue you to the
vttermost of my power. If I deserue punishment for this, I will receiue
it at your hands, as from my Lord, as if it were a fauour. For the loue
which I did beare to the excellent Gouernour, and which I beare to you
hath no limit. And like as you giue me chastisement, so will you also
shew me fauour. And that which now I craue of you is this, to declare
your will vnto me, and those things, wherein I may bee able to doe you
the most and best seruice.

The Gouernour answered him, that because he did not find him in that
towne, hee was incensed against him, thinking he had absented himselfe,
as others had done: But seeing he now knew his loyaltie and loue, he
would alwaies hold him as a brother, and fauour him in all his affaires.
The Cacique went with him to the towne where he resided, which was a
daies iournie from thence. [Sidenote: Salt made of salt springs of
water.] They passed through a smal town, where there was a lake, where
the Indians made salt: and the Christians made some one day while they
rested there, of a brackish water, which sprang neere the towne in ponds
like fountaines. The Gouernour staied in Chaguate sixe daies. There he
was informed of the habitation that was toward the West. They told him,
that three daies iournie from thence was a Prouince called Aguacay. The
day that he departed from Chaguate, a Christian, called Francisco de
Guzman, the base sonne of a Gentleman of Siuill, staied behind, and went
to the Indians, with an Indian woman which he kept as his concubine, for
feare he should be punished for gaming debts, that he did owe. The
Gouernor had trauelled two daies before he missed him; hee sent the
Cacique word to seeke him vp, and to send him to Aguacay, whither he
trauelled: which hee did not performe. From the Cacique of Aguacay,
before they came into the Countrie, there met him on the way 15. Indians
with a present of skinnes, fish and rosted venison. The Gouernour came
to his towne on Wednesday, the fourth of Iulie. He found the towne
without people, and lodged in it: he staied there about a day; during
which, he made some roades, and tooke many men and women. There they had
knowledge of the South Sea. Here there was great store of salt made of
sand, which they gather in a vaine of ground like peeble stones. And it
was made as they make salt in Cayas.


                              Chap. XXXII.

    How the Gouernour went from Aguacay to Naguatex, and what happened
      vnto him.

The same day that the Gouernour departed from Aguacay he lodged in a
small towne subiect to the Lord of that prouince. The Campe pitched hard
by a lake of salt water; and that euening they made some salt there. The
day following hee lodged betweene two mountaines in a thinne groue of
wood. The next day hee came to a small towne called Pato. The fourth day
after his departure from Aguacay he came to the first habitation of a
prouince called Amaye. There an Indian was taken, which said that from
thence to Naguatex was a day and a halfes iourney: which they trauelled,
finding all the way inhabited places. Hauing passed the peopled countrie
of Amaye, on Saturday the 20. of Iulie they pitched their Campe at noone
betweene Amaye and Naguatex along the corner of a groue of very faire
trees. In the same place certaine Indians were discouered, which came to
view them. The horsemen went out to them, and killed six, and tooke two;
whom the Gouernour asked, wherefore they came? They said, to know what
people hee had, and what order they kept; and that the Cacique of
Naguatex their Lord had sent them, and that he, with other Caciques,
which came to aide him, determined that day to bid him battell. While
they were occupied in these questiones and answeres, there came many
Indians by two waies in two squadrons: and when they saw they were
descried, giuing a great crie they assaulted the Christians each
squadron by it selfe: but seeing what resistance the Christians made
them, they turned their backes and betooke themselues to flight, in
which many of them lost their liues: and most of the horsemen following
them in chase, carelesse of the Camp, other two squadrons of Indians,
which lay in ambush, set vpon the Christians that were in the Campe,
which also they resisted, who also had their reward as the first. After
the flight of the Indians, and that the Christians were retired, they
heard a great noise a crossebow shot from the place where they were. The
Gouernour sent twelue horsemen to see what it was. They found sixe
Christians, foure footemen and two horsemen, among many Indians; the
horsemen defending the footemen with great labour. These being of them
that chased the first two squadrons, had lost themselues, and comming to
recouer the Campe fell among those with whom they were fighting: and so
they, and those that came to succour them, slew many of the Indians, and
brought one aliue to the Campe: whom the Gouernour examined, who they
were that came to bid him battell. He told him, that they were the
Cacique of Naguatex, and of Amaye, and another of a prouince called
Hacanac, a Lord of great Countries and many subiects: and that the
Cacique of Naguatex came for Captaine and chiefest of them all. The
Gouernour commanded his right arme and nose to be cut off, and sent him
to the Cacique of Naguatex, charging him to tell him, that the next day
hee would be in his countrey to destroy him; and if hee would withstand
his entrance, hee should stay for him. That night he lodged there; and
the next day hee came to the habitation of Naguatex, which was very
scattering: he inquired where the Caciques chiefe towne was? They told
him that it was on the other side of a Riuer, that passed thereby: hee
trauelled thitherward, and came vnto it: and on the other side he saw
many Indians, that taried for him, making shew as though they would
defend the passage. And because hee knew not whether it could bee waded,
nor where the passage was; and that some Christians and horses were
hurt; that they might haue time to recouer, he determined to rest
certaine daies in the towne where he was. So hee pitched his campe a
quarter of a league from the Riuer, because the weather was very hot,
neere vnto the towne, in a thinne groue of very faire and hie trees
neere a brookes side: and in that place were certaine Indians taken;
whom hee examined, whether the Riuer were wadeable or no? They said,
yea, at some times, and in some places. [Sidenote: August.] [Sidenote:
They passe the Riuer.] Within ten daies after he sent two Captaines with
fifteene horsemen a peece vpward and downe the Riuer with Indians to
shew them where they should goe ouer, to see what habitation was on the
other side: And the Indians withstood them both, defending the passage
of the Riuer as farre as they were able, but they passed in despite of
them: and on the other side of the Riuer they saw great store of
victuals; and with these newes returned to the Camp.


                              Chap. XXXIII.

    How the Cacique of Naguatex came to visite the Gouernour: and how
      the Gouernour departed from Naguatex and came to Nondacao.

The Gouernour sent an Indian from Naguatex where hee lay, to command the
Cacique to come to serue and obey him, and that hee would forgiue him
all that was past; and if he came not, that he would seeke him, and giue
him such punishment as he had deserued for that which he had done
against him. Within two daies the Indian returned, and said that the
Cacique would come the next day: which, the same day when he came, sent
many Indians before him, among whom there were some principall men: hee
sent them to see what countenance they found in the Gouernour, to
resolue with himselfe whether hee should goe or not. The Indians let him
vnderstand, that he was comming, and went away presently: and the
Cacique came within two houres accompanied with many of his men: they
came all in a ranke one before another on both sides, leauing a lane in
the middest where hee came. [Sidenote: Tulla not far from Naguatex,
Eastward.] They came where the Gouernour was, all of them weeping after
the manner of Tulla, which was not farre from thence toward the East.
The Cacique made his due obedience, and this speech following:

Right high and mightie Lord, whom all the world ought to serue and obey,
I was bold to appeare before your Lordship, hauing committed so heinous
and abominable an act, as only for me to haue imagined, deserued to be
punished; trusting in your greatnes, that although I deserue to obtaine
no pardon, yet for your owne sake only you will vse clemencie toward me,
considering how small I am in comparison of your Lordship; and not to
think vpon my weaknesses, which, to my griefe and for my greater good, I
haue knowne. And I beleeue that you and yours are immortall; and that
your Lordship is Lord of the land of nature, seeing that you subdue all
things, and they obey you, euen the very hearts of men. For when I
beheld the slaughter and destruction of my men in the battell, which,
through mine ignorance, and the counsell of a brother of mine, which
died in the same, I gaue your Lordship, presently I repented me in my
heart of the error, which I had committed; and desired to serue and obey
you: and to this end I come, that your Lordship may chastise and command
mee as your owne.

The Gouernour answered him, that he forgaue him all which was past, that
from thenceforth hee should do his dutie, and that he would hold him for
his friend, and that he would fauour him in all things. [Sidenote: The
Riuer growne vnpassable in August, at Naguatex.] Within foure daies hee
departed thence, and comming to the Riuer he could not passe, because it
was growne very bigge; which seemed to him a thing of admiration, being
at that time that it was, and since it had not rained a moneth before.
The Indians said, that it increased many times after that manner
without raining in all the countrie. [Sidenote: Coniectures of a Sea to
the Northward.] It was supposed, that it might be the tide that came
into it. It was learned that the flood came alway from aboue, and that
the Indians of all that countrie had no knowledge of the Sea. The
Gouernour returned vnto the place where he had lodged before: and
vnderstanding within eight daies after that the Riuer was passable, he
departed. He passed ouer and found the towne without people: he lodged
in the field, and sent the Cacique word to come vnto him, and to bring
him a guide to goe forward. And some daies being past, seeing the
Cacique came not, nor sent any bodie, hee sent two Captaines sundrie
waies to burne the townes, and to take such Indians as they could finde:
They burnt great store of victuals, and took many Indians. The Cacique
seeing the hurt that he receiued in his countrie, sent sixe principall
Indians with three men for guides which knew the language of the
countrie, through which the Gouernour was to passe. Hee departed
presently from Naguatex, and within three daies iourney came to a towne
of foure or fiue houses, which belonged to the Cacique of that prouince,
which is called Nissoone: it was euill inhabited and had little Maiz.
Two daies iourney forward the guides which guided the Gouernour, if they
were to goe Westward, guided him to the East; and sometimes went vp and
downe through very great woods out of the way. The Gouernour commanded
them to bee hanged vpon a tree: and a woman that they tooke in Nissoone
guided him, and went backe againe to seeke the way. In two daies he came
to another miserable towne called Lacane: an Indian was taken in that
place, that said, that the countrie of Nondacao was a countrie of great
habitation, and the houses scattering the one from the other, as they
vse to bee in mountains, and had great store of Maiz. The Cacique came
with his men weeping, like them of Naguatex: for this is their vse in
token of obedience: hee made him a present of much fish, and offered to
doe what he would command him. Hee tooke his leaue, and gaue him a guide
to the prouince of Soacatino.


                              Chap. XXXIV.

    How the Gouernour went from Nondacao to Soacatino and Guasco, and
      passed through a desert, from whence, for want of a guide, and an
      interpretour, he returned to Nilco.

The Gouernour departed from Nondacao toward Soacatino, and in fiue
daies iournie came to a Prouince called Aays. The Indians which
inhabited it, had no notice of the Christians: but assoone as they saw
that they entred into their country, they assembled themselues: and as
they came together 50. or 100. they came foorth to fight: while some
fought, others came and charged our men another way, and while they
followed some, others followed them. The fight lasted the greatest part
of the day, till they came to their towne. Some horses and men were
wounded, but not to any hurt of their trauelling: for there was no wound
that was dangerous. There was a great spoile made of the Indians. That
day that the Gouernour departed from thence, the Indian that guided him
said, that in Nondacao he had heard say, that the Indians of Soacatino
had seene other Christians, whereof they all were very glad: thinking it
might be true, and that they might haue entred into those parts by Nueua
Espanna; and that if it were so, it was in their owne hand to goe out of
Florida, if they found nothing of profit: for they feared they should
lose themselues in some wildernes. This Indian led him two daies out of
the way. The Gouernour commanded to torture him. He said, that the
Cacique of Nondacao, his Lord, had commanded him to guide them so,
because they were his enemies, and that hee was to doe as his Lord
commanded him. The Gouernour commanded him to be cast to the dogs: and
another guided him to Soacatino, whither hee came the day following. It
was a verie poore Countrie: there was great want of Maiz in that place.
Hee asked the Indians, whether they knew of any other Christians. They
said, that a little from thence toward the South they heard they were.
[Sidenote: 20. daies trauell toward the South.] He trauelled 20. daies
through a Countrie euill inhabited, where they suffered great scarcitie
and trouble. For that little Maiz which the Indians had, they had hidden
and buried in the woods, where the Christians, after they were well
wearied with their trauell, at the end of their iournie went to seeke by
digging what they should eat. [Sidenote: Guasco: here they found some
Turkie stones and mantles of cotton wooll. Chap. 35.] At last, comming
to a Prouince that was called Guasco, they found Maiz, wherewith they
loaded their horses, and the Indians that they had. From thence they
went to another towne called Naquiscoça. The Indians said, they had no
notice of any other Christians. The Gouernor commanded to torment them.
They said, that they came first to another Lordship, which was called
Naçacahoz, and from thence returned again to the West, from whence they
came. The Gouernour came in two daies to Naçacahoz: Some women were
taken there: among whom there was one, which said, that she had seene
Christians, and had been taken by them, and had run away. The Gouernour
sent a Captaine with 15. horsemen to the place where the women said she
had seene them, to see if there were any signe of horses, or any token
of their being there. After they had gone three or foure leagues the
woman that guided them said, that all that she had told them was vntrue.
And so they held all the rest that the Indians had said, of seeing
Christians in the land of Florida. And, because the Countrie that way
was poore of Maiz, and toward the West, there was no notice of any
habitation, they returned to Guasco. The Indians told them there, that
10. daies iournie from thence toward the West, was a Riuer called
Daycao; whither they went sometimes a hunting and killing of Deere: and
that they had seene people on the other side, but knew not what
habitation was there. [Sidenote: The Riuer of Daycayo: which seemeth to
be the Rio del oro.] There the Christians tooke such Maiz as they found
and could carrie, and, going 10. daies iournie through a wildernesse,
they came to the Riuer which the Indians had told them of. Ten horsemen,
which the Gouernour had sent before, passed ouer the same, and went in a
way that led to the Riuer, and lighted vpon a companie of Indians that
dwelt in verie little cabins: who, assoone as they saw them, tooke
themselues to flight, leauing that which they had; all which was nothing
but miserie and pouertie. The Countrie was so poore, that among them all
there was not found halfe a peck of Maiz. The horsemen tooke two
Indians, and returned with them to the Riuer, where the Gouernour staied
for them. He sought to learne of them what habitation was toward the
West. There was none in the Camp that could vnderstand their language.
The Gouernour assembled the Captaines and principall persons, to
determine with their aduice what they should doe. And the most part
said, that they thought it best to returne backe to Rio grande, or the
Great Riuer of Guachoya; because that in Nilco and thereabout was store
of Maiz: saying, that they would make pinaces that winter, and the next
sommer passe down the Riuer to seaward in them, and comming to the Sea
they would goe along the coast to Nueua Espanna. For though it seemed a
doubtfull thing and difficult, by that which they had already alleaged,
yet it was the last remedie they had. [Sidenote: No trauelling by land
without an interpretour.] For by land they could not goe for want of an
Interpretour. And they held, that the countrie beyond the Riuer of
Daycao, where they were, was that which Cabeça de Vaca mentioned in his
relation that he passed of the Indians, which liued like the Alarbes,
hauing no setled place, and fed vpon Tunas and rootes of the fields, and
wilde beasts that they killed. Which if it were so, if they should enter
into it and finde no victuals to passe the winter, they could not chuse
but perish. For they were entred alreadie into the beginning of October:
and if they staied any longer, they were not able to returne for raine
and snowes, nor to sustaine themselues in so poore a countrey. The
Gouernour (that desired long to see himselfe in a place where hee might
sleepe his full sleep, rather then to conquer and gouerne a countrie
where so many troubles presented themselues) presently returned back
that same way that he came.


                              Chap. XXXV.

    How they returned to Nilco, and came to Minoya, where they agreed
      to make ships to depart out of the land of Florida.

When that which was determined was published in the Campe, there were
many that were greatly grieued at it: for they held the Sea voyage as
doubtfull, for the euill meanes they had, and of as great danger, as the
trauelling by land: and they hoped to finde some rich countrie before
they came to the land of the Christians, by that which Cabeça de Vaca
had told the Emperour: and that was this; [Sidenote: Gold, siluer, and
precious stones in Florida.] That after hee had found clothes made of
cotton wooll, hee saw gold and siluer, and stones of great value. And
they had not yet come where hee had been. For vntill that place hee
alwaies trauelled by the Sea coast: and they trauelled farre within the
land; and that going toward the West, of necessitie they should come
where hee had been. For he said, That in a certain place he trauelled
many daies, and entred into the land toward the North. [Sidenote:
Turkie stones and mantles of cotton wooll found in Guasco.] And in Guasco
they had alreadie found some Turkie stones, and mantles of cotton wooll:
which the Indians signified by signes that they had from the West: and
that holding that course they should draw neere to the land of the
Christians. But though they were much discontented with it, and it
grieued many to goe backward, which would rather haue aduentured their
liues and haue died in the land of Florida, then to haue gone poore out
of it: yet were they not a sufficient part to hinder that which was
determined, because the principall men agreed with the Gouernour. And
afterward there was one that said, hee would put out one of his owne
eyes, to put out another of Luis de Moscoso; because it would grieue him
much to see him prosper: because aswell himself as others of his friends
had crossed that which he durst not haue done, seeing that within two
daies hee should leaue the gouernment. [Sidenote: 150. leagues betweene
the Riuer of Daycao, and Rio grande.] From Daycao, where now they were,
to Rio grande, or the Great Riuer, was 150. leagues: which vnto that
place they had gone Westward. And by the way as they returned backe they
had much adoe to find Maiz to eate: for where they had passed, the
countrey was destroyed: and some little Maiz that was left the Indians
had hidden. The townes which in Naguatex they had burned (whereof it
repented them) were repaired againe, and the houses full of Maiz.
[Sidenote: Fine earthen vessels.] This countrie is well inhabited and
plentifull. In that place are vessels made of clay, which differ very
little from those of Estremoz, or Monte-mor. In Chaguate the Indians by
commandement of the Cacique came peaceably, and said, that the Christian
which remained there would not come. The Gouernour wrote vnto him, and
sent him inke and paper that he might answere. The substance of the
words of the letter was to declare vnto him his determination, which
was, to goe out of the land of Florida, and to put him in remembrance
that he was a Christian, that hee would not remaine in the subiection of
Infidels, that he pardoned him the fault which he had done in going away
to the Indians, that hee should come vnto him: and if they did stay him,
that hee would aduertise him thereof by writing. The Indian went with
the letters and came again without any more answere, then, on the back
side, his name and his seale, that they might know he was aliue. The
Gouernour sent twelue horsemen to seeke him: but he, which had his
spies, so hid himselfe, that they could not find him. For want of Maiz
the Gouernour could not stay any longer to seeke him. Hee departed from
Chaguate, and passed the Riuer by Aays; going downe by it hee found a
towne called Chilano, which as yet they had not seen. They came to
Nilco, and found so little Maiz, as could not suffice till they made
their ships; because the Christians, being in Guachoya in the seede
time, the Indians for feare of them durst not come to sow the grounds of
Nilco: and they knew not thereabout any other countrie where any Maiz
was: and that was the most fruitfull soile that was thereaway, and where
they had most hope to finde it. Euery one was confounded, and the most
part thought it bad counsell to come backe from the Riuer of Dacayo, and
not to haue followed their fortune, going that way that went ouer land.
For by Sea it seemed impossible to saue themselues, vnlesse God would
worke a miracle for them: for there was neither Pilot, nor Sea-chart,
neither did they know where the Riuer entred into the Sea, neither had
they notice of it, neither had they any thing wherewith to make sailes,
nor any store of Enequem, which is a grasse whereof they make Okam,
which grew there: and that which they found they saued to calke the
Pinaces withall, neither had they any thing to pitch them withall:
neither could they make ships of such substance, but that any storme
would put them in great danger: and they feared much it would fall out
with them, as it did with Pamphilo de Naruaez, which was cast away vpon
that coast: And aboue all it troubled them most, that they could find no
Maiz: for without it they could not bee sustained, nor could doe any
thing that they had neede of. All of them were put to great confusion.
Their chiefe remedy was to commit themselues to God, and to beseech him
that he would direct them the way that they might saue their liues. And
it pleased him of his goodnesse, that the Indians of Nilco came
peaceablie, and told them, that two daies iourney from thence, neere
vnto the Great Riuer, were two townes, whereof the Christians had no
notice, and that the prouince was called Minoya, and was a fruitfull
soile: that, whether at this present there was any Maiz or no, they knew
not, because they had warre with them: but that they would be very glad
with the fauour of the Christians to goe and spoyle them. The Gouernour
sent a Captaine thither with horsemen and footmen, and the Indians of
Nilco with him. Hee came to Minoya, and found two great townes seated
in a plaine and open soile, halfe a league distant, one in sight of
another, and in them hee tooke many Indians, and found great store of
Maiz. Presently he lodged in one of them, and sent word to the Gouernour
what hee had found: wherewith they were all exceeding glad. They
departed from Nilco in the beginning of December; and all that way, and
before from Chilano, they endured much trouble: for they passed through
many waters, and many times it rained with a Northren winde, and was
exceeding cold, so that they were in the open field with water ouer and
vnderneath them: and when at the end of their daies iourney they found
drie ground to rest vpon, they gaue great thanks to God. With this
trouble almost all the Indians that serued them died. And after they
were in Minoya, many Christians also died: and the most part were sicke
of great and dangerous diseases, which had a spice of the lethargie. At
this place died Andrew de Vasconcelos, and two Portugals of Eluas, which
were very neere him: which were brethren, and by their surname called
Sotis. The Christians lodged in one of the townes, which they liked
best: which was fensed about, and distant a quarter of a league from the
Great Riuer. The Maiz that was in the other towne was brought thither;
and in all it was esteemed to bee 6000. hanegs or bushels. And there was
the best timber to make ships, that they had seene in all the land of
Florida: wherefore all of them gaue God great thankes for so singular a
fauour, and hoped that that which they desired would take effect, which
was, that they might safely bee conducted into the land of the
Christians.


                              Chap. XXXVI.

    How there were seuen Brigandines builded, and how they departed
      from Minoya.

Assoone as they came to Minoya, the Gouernor commanded them to gather
all the chaines together, which euerie one had to lead Indians in; and
to gather all the yron which they had for their prouision, and al the
rest that was in the Camp: and to set vp a forge to make nailes, and
commanded them to cut downe timber for the brigandines. And a Portugall
of Ceuta, who hauing bin a prisoner in Fez, had learned to saw timber
with a long saw, which for such purposes they had carried with them,
did teach others, which helped him to saw timber. And a Genowis, whom it
pleased God to preserue (for without him they had neuer come out of the
countrie: for there has neuer another that could make ships but hee)
with foure or fiue other Biscaine carpenters, which hewed his plancks
and other timbers, made the brigandines: And two calkers, the one of
Genua, the other of Sardinia did calke them with the tow of an hearb
like hempe, whereof before I haue made mention, which there is named
Enequen. And because there was not enough of it, they calked them with
the flaxe of the Countrie, and with the mantles, which they rauelled for
that purpose. A cooper which they had among them fell sicke, and was at
the point of death: and there was none other that had any skill in that
trade: it pleased God to send him his health: And albeit he was verie
weake, and could not labour; yet 15. daies before they departed, he made
for euery brigandine two halfe hogs heads, which the mariners call
quarterets, because foure of them hold a pipe of water. [Sidenote:
Taguanate two daies iourney aboue Minoya.] The Indians which dwelt two
daies iournie aboue the Riuer in a Prouince called Taguanate, and
likewise those of Nilco and Guacoya, and others their neighbours seeing
the brigandines in making, thinking, because their places of refuge are
in the water, that they were to goe to seeke them: and because the
Gouernour demanded mantles of them, as necessarie for sailes, came many
times, and brought many mantles, and great store of fish. And for
certaine it seemed that God was willing to fauour them in so great
necessitie, moouing the minds of the Indians to bring them: for to goe
to take them, they were neuer able. For in the towne where they were,
assoone as winter came in, they were so inclosed and compassed with
water, that they could go no farther by land, then a league, and a
league and an half. [Sidenote: The great vse of horses.] And if they
would go farther, they could carrie no horses, and without them they
were not able to fight with the Indians, because they were many: and so
many for so many (numbers being equal) on foote they had the aduantage
of them by water and by land, because they were more apt and lighter,
and by reason of the disposition of the Countrie, which was according to
their desire for the vse of their warre. They brought also some cords,
and those which wanted for cables were made of the barkes of Mulberrie
trees. They made stirrops of wood, and made ankers of their stirrops.
[Sidenote: The mightie increasing of the Riuer for two moneths space, to
wit, all March and April.] In the moneth of March, when it had not
rained a moneth before, the Riuer grew so big, that it came to Nilco,
which was nine leagues off: and on the other side, the Indians said,
that it reached other nine leagues into the land. In the towne where the
Christians were, which was somewhat high ground, where they could best
goe, the water reached to the stirrops. They made certaine rafts of
timber, and laid manie boughes vpon them, wheron they set their horses,
and in the houses they did the like. But seeing that nothing preuailed,
they went vp to the lofts: and if they went out of the houses, it was in
canoes, or on horseback in those places where the ground was hiest. So
they were two moneths, and could doe nothing, during which time the
Riuer decreased not. The Indians ceased not to come vnto the brigantines
as they were wont, and came in canoes. At that time the Gouernour feared
they would set vpon him. Hee commanded his men to take an Indian
secretly of those that came to the towne, and to stay him till the rest
were gone: and they tooke one. The Gouernour commanded him to bee put to
torture, to make him confesse, whether the Indians did practise any
treason or no. [Sidenote: The grand conspiracie of the Indians against
the Christians.] Hee confessed that the Caciques of Nilco, Guachoya, and
Taguanate, and others, which in al were about 20. Caciques, with a great
number of people, determined to come vpon him; and that three daies
before, they would send a great present of fish to colour their great
treason and malice, and on the verie day they would send some Indians
before with another present. [Sidenote: Note well.] And these with those
which were our slaues, which were of their conspiracie also, should set
the houses on fire, and first of all possesse themselues of the lances
which stood at the doores of the houses; and the Caciques with all their
men should bee neere the towne in ambush in the wood, and when they saw
the fire kindled, should come, and make an end of the conquest. The
Gouernour commanded the Indian to be kept in a chaine, and the selfesame
day that he spake of there came 30. Indians with fish. [Sidenote:
Thirtie Indians of the Cacique of Guachoya haue their right hands cut
off.] He commanded their right hands to be cut off, and sent them so
backe to the Cacique of Guachoya, whose men they were. He sent him word,
that he and the rest should come when they would, for he desired
nothing more, and that hee should know, that they thought not any thing
which he knew not before they thought of it. Hereupon they all were put
in a very great feare: And the Caciques of Nilco and Taguanate came to
excuse themselues: and a few daies after came he of Guachoya, and a
principall Indian and his subiect, said, he knew by certaine
information, That the Caciques of Nilco and Taguanate were agreed to
come and make warre vpon the Christians. Assoone as the Indians came
from Nilco, the Gouernour examined them, and they confessed it was true.
Hee deliuered them presently to the principall man of Guachoya, which
drew them out of the towne and killed them. Another day came some from
Taguanate, and confessed it likewise. [Sidenote: The right hands and
noses of traitours cut off.] The Gouernour commanded their right hands
and noses to be cut off, and sent them to the Cacique, wherewith they of
Guachoya remained very well contented: and they came oftentimes with
presents of mantles and fish, and hogs, which bred in the Countrie of
some swine that were lost by the way the last yeere. Assoone as the
waters were slaked, they perswaded the Gouernour to send men to
Taguanate: They came and brought canoes, wherein the footemen were
conueied downe the Riuer, and a Captaine with horsemen went by land; and
the Indians of Guachoya, which guided him, till they came to Taguanate,
assaulted the towne, and tooke many men and women, and mantles, which
with those that they had alreadie were sufficient to supplie their want.
[Sidenote: The Riuer increaseth but once a yeere when the snowes doe
melt in March and Aprill.] The brigandines being finished in the moneth
of Iune, the Indians hauing told vs, That the Riuer increased but once a
yeere, when the snowes did melt, in the time wherein I mentioned it had
alreadie increased, being now in sommer, and hauing not rained a long
time, it pleased God, that the flood came vp to the towne to seeke the
brigandines, from whence they carried them by water to the Riuer.
[Sidenote: A miraculous accident.] Which, if they had gone by land, had
been in danger of breaking and splitting their keeles, and to bee all
vndone; because that for want of iron, the spikes were short, and the
planckes and timber very weake. The Indians of Minoya, during the time
that they were there, came to serue them (being driuen thereunto by
necessity) that of the Maiz which they had taken from them they would
bestow some crummes vpon them. And because the Countrie was fertill, and
the people vsed to feed of Maiz, and the Christians had gotten all from
them that they had, and the people were many, they were not able to
sustaine themselues. Those which came to the towne were so weake and
feeble, that they had no flesh left on their bones: and many came and
died neere the towne for pure hunger and weaknesse. The Gouernour
commanded vpon grieuous punishments to giue them no Maiz. Yet, when they
saw that the hogges wanted it not, and that they had yeelded themselues
to serue them, and considering their miserie and wretchednes, hauing
pity of them, they gaue them part of the Maiz which they had. And when
the time of their embarkment came, there was not sufficient to serue
their own turnes. That which there was, they put into the brigandines,
and into great canoes tied two and two together. They shipped 22. of the
best horses, that were in the Camp, the rest they made dried flesh of;
and dressed the hogges which they had in like manner. They departed from
Minoya the second day of Iulie, 1543.


                              Chap. XXXVII.

    As the Christians went downe the great Riuer on their voyage, the
      Indians of Quigalta did set vpon them, and what was the successe
      thereof.

The day before they departed from Minoya, they determined to dismisse al
the men and women of the Countrie, which they had detained as slaues to
serue them, saue some hundred, little more or lesse, which the Gouernour
embarked, and others whom it pleased him to permit. And because there
were many men of qualitie, whom he could not deny that which he granted
to others, he vsed a policy, saying, that they might serue them as long
as they were in the Riuer, but when they came to the sea, they must send
them away for want of water, because they had but few vessels. He told
his friends in secret, that they should carrie theirs to Nueua Espanna:
And all those whom hee bare no good will vnto (which were the greater
number) ignorant of that which was hidden from them, which afterward
time discouered, thinking it inhumanitie for so little time of seruice,
in reward of the great seruice that they had done them, to carrie them
with them, [Sidenote: 500. Slaues left in the Countrie.] to leaue them
slaues to other men out of their owne Countries; left fiue hundred men
and women: among whom were many boies and girles, which spake and
vnderstood the Spanish tongue. The most of them did nothing but weepe:
which mooued great compassion; seeing that all of them with good will
would haue become Christians, and were left in state of perdition.
[Sidenote: They sailed down Rio Grande from Minoya 17. daies before they
came to the mouth thereof.] There went from Minoya 322. Spaniards in
seuen brigandines, well made, saue that the plankes were thin, because
the nailes were short, and were not pitched, nor had any decks to keep
the water from comming in. In stead of decks they laid planks, whereon
the mariners might runne to trim their sailes, and the people might
refresh themselues aboue and below: The Gouernour made his Captaines,
and gaue to euery one his brigandine, and took their oth and their word,
that they would obey him, vntill they came to the land of the
Christians. The Gouernour tooke one of the brigandines for himself,
which he best liked. The same day that they departed from Minoya, they
passed by Guachoya, where the Indians tarried for them in canoes by the
Riuer. And on the shore, they had made a great arbour with boughes: They
desired him to come on shore; but he excused himselfe, and so went
along: The Indians in their canoes accompanied him; and comming where an
arme of the Riuer diclined on the right hand, they said, that the
Prouince of Quigalta was neere vnto that place, and importuned the
Gouernour to set vpon him, and that they would aide him. And because
they had said, that he dwelt three daies journie down the Riuer, the
Gouernour supposed that they had plotted some treason against him, and
there left them; and went downe with the greatest force of the water.
The current was very strong, and with the helpe of ores, they went very
swiftly. The first day they landed in a wood on the left hand of the
Riuer, and at night they withdrew themselues to the brigandines.
[Sidenote: The second day.] The next day they came to a towne, where
they went on shore, and the people that was in it durst not tarrie. A
woman that they tooke there being examined, said, that that towne
belonged to a Cacique named Huasene, subiect to Quigalta, and that
Quigalta tarried for them below in the Riuer with many men. Certaine
horsemen went thither, and found some houses, wherein was much Maiz.
Immediately more of them went thither and tarried there one day,
[Sidenote: Another day.] in which they did beate out, and tooke as much
Maiz as they needed. While they were there, many Indians came from the
nether part of the Riuer, and on the other side right against them
somewhat carelessely set themselues in order to fight. The Gouernour
sent in two canoes the crossebowmen that he had, and as many more as
could goe in them. They ran away, and seeing the Spaniards could not
ouertake them, they returned backe, and tooke courage; and coming
neerer, making an outcrie, they threatned them: and assoone as they
departed thence, they went after them, some in canoes, and some by land
along the Riuer; and getting before, comming to a towne that stood by
the Riuers side, they ioyned al together, making a shew that they would
tarrie there. Euerie brigandine towed a canoe fastened to their sternes
for their particular seruice. [Sidenote: A town burned.] Presently
there entred men into euerie one of them, which made the Indians to
flie, and burned the town. The same day they presently landed in a great
field, where the Indians durst not tarrie. [Sidenote: The third day. A
fleet of an hundred faire and great canoes.] The next day there were
gathered together an hundred canoes, among which were some that carried
60. and 70. men, and the principall mens canoes had their tilts, and
plumes of white and red feathers for their ensignes: and they came
within two crossebow shot of the brigandines, and sent three Indians in
a small canoe with a fained message to view the manner of the
brigandines, and what weapons they had. And comming to the side of the
Gouernours brigandine, one of the Indians entred, and said:

That the Cacique of Quigalta his Lord, sent him his commendations, and
did let him vnderstand, that all the Indians of Guachoya had told him
concerning himselfe, was false, and that they had incensed him, because
they were his enemies; that he was his seruant, and should find him so.

The Gouernour answered him, that he beleeued all that he said was true,
and willed him to tell him, that he esteemed his friendship very much.
With this answer they returned to the place where the rest in their
canoes were waiting for them, and from thence all of them fell downe,
and came neere the Spaniards, shouting aloud, and threatning of them.
The Gouernour sent Iohn de Guzman, which had been a Captaine of footemen
in Florida, with 15. armed men in canoes to make them giue way. Assoone
as the Indians saw them come towards them, they diuided themselues into
two parts, and stood still till the Spaniards came nie them, and when
they were come neere them, they ioyned together on both sides, taking
Iohn de Guzman in the middest, and then they came first with him, and
with great furie borded them: And as their canoes were bigger, and many
of them leaped into the water to stay them, and to lay hold on the
canoes of the Spaniards, and ouerwhelme them; so presently they
ouerwhelmed them. The Christians fell into the water, and with the
weight of their armour sunke downe to the bottome: and some few, that by
swimming or holding by the canoe could haue saued themselues, with oares
and staues, which they had, they strooke them on the head and made them
sinke. When they of the brigandines saw the ouerthrow, though they went
about to succour them, yet through the current of the Riuer they could
not goe backe. Foure Spaniards fled to the brigandine that was neerest
to the canoes; and only these escaped of those that came among the
Indians. [Sidenote: Eleven Spaniards drowned.] They were eleuen that
died there: among whom Iohn de Guzman was one, and a sonne of Don
Carlos, called Iohn de Vargas: the rest also were persons of account and
men of great courage. Those that escaped by swimming, said that they saw
the Indians enter the canoe of John de Guzman at the sterne of one of
their canoes, and whether they carried him away dead or aliue they could
not certainly tell.


                            Chap. XXXVIII.

      Which declareth how they were pursued by the Indians.

The Indians, seeing that they had gotten the victorie, tooke such
courage, that they assaulted them in the brigandines, which they durst
not doe before. [Sidenote: 25. Spaniards wounded.] They came first to
that brigandine wherein Calderon went for Captaine, and was in the
rereward: and at the first volie of arrowes they wounded 25. men. There
were only foure armed men in this brigandine: these did stand at the
brigandines side to defend it. Those that were vnarmed, seeing how they
hurt them, left their oares and went vnder the deck: whereupon the
brigandine began to crosse, and to goe where the current of the streame
carried it. One of the armed men seeing this, without the commandement
of the Captaine, made a footman to take an oare and stirre the
brigandine, hee standing before him and defending him with his target.
[Sidenote: The great vse of large targets.] The Indians came no neerer
then a bowshot, from whence they offended and were not offended,
receiuing no hurt: for in euery brigandine was but one crossebow, and
those which wee had were very much out of order. So that the Christians
did nothing else but stand for a butte to receiue their arrowes. Hauing
left this brigandine they went to another, and fought with it halfe an
houre; and so from one to another they fought with them all. [Sidenote:
Strong mats a good defence against arrowes.] The Christians had mattes
to lay vnder them, which were double, and so close and strong, that no
arrow went thorow them. And assoone as the Indians gaue them leisure,
they fensed the brigandines with them. And the Indians seeing that they
could not shoote leuell, shot their arrowes at random vp into the aire,
which fell into the brigandines, and hurt some of the men: and not
therewith contented, they sought to get to them which were in the canoes
with the horses. Those of the brigandines enuironed them to defend them,
and tooke them among them. Thus seeing themselues much vexed by them,
and so wearied that they could no longer endure it, they determined to
trauell all the night following, thinking to get beyond the countrie of
Quigalta, and that they would leaue them: but when they thought least of
it, supposing they had now left them, they heard very neere them so
great outcries, that they made them deafe, and so they followed vs all
that night, and the next day till noone, by which time we were come into
the countrie of others, whom they desired to vse vs after the same
manner; and so they did. The men of Quigalta returned home; and the
other in fiftie canoes fought with vs a whole day and a night: and they
entred one of the brigandines, that came in the rereward by the canoe
which she had at her sterne, and tooke away a woman which they found in
it, and afterward hurt some of the men of the brigandines. Those which
came with the horses in the canoes, being wearie with rowing night and
day, lingered behind; and presently the Indians came vpon them, and they
of the brigandines tarried for them. The Gouernour resolued to goe on
shore and to kill the horses, because of the slow way which they made
because of them. Assoone as they saw a place conuenient for it, they
[Sidenote: Dried horseflesh for food.] went thither and killed the
horses, and brought the flesh of them to drie it aboord. Foure or fiue
of them remained on shore aliue: The Indians went vnto them, after the
Spaniards were embarked. The horses were not acquainted with them, and
began to neigh, and runne vp and downe, in such sort, that the Indians,
for feare of them, leaped into the water: and getting into their canoes
went after the brigandines, shooting cruelly at them. They followed vs
that euening and the night following till the next day at tenne of the
clocke, and then returned vp the Riuer. Presently from a small towne
that stood vpon the Riuer came seuen canoes, and followed vs a little
way downe the Riuer, shooting at vs: but seeing they were so few that
they could do vs but little harme, they returned to their towne. From
thence forward, vntill they came to the Sea, they had no encounter. They
sailed downe the Riuer seuenteene daies, which may be two hundred and
fifty leagues iourney, little more or lesse: and neere vnto the Sea the
Riuer is diuided into two armes; each of them is a league and an halfe
broad.

